20 of the Most Famous Photos in the History of Photography

More than any other art form, photography has a decisive ability to transport the viewer to a particular place and moment. It could be a moment of elation, sadness, desperation, or any other feeling, but for over a century photography hasdocumented and shaped the course of history, with a select few having a lasting legacy.
Something as simple as a still photograph can have a transformative effect. In the right hands, a camera is a tool of exploration, a passport to an inner sanctum, or an exciting instrument for change that can bring about revolution and influence public thinking.
A picture has the power to inflame the senses and move people to act. The photo could be an impulsive, spontaneous moment of everyday life – that which the French photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson would come to describe as the ‘decisive moment’ – or it couldbe something more staged, but either way the photographs influence on culture is undeniable.
From instants from everyday city life, to defining moments in history, acts of bravery and courage, shocking moments of violence andwar, love, and happiness – the camera has been at every moment of history in the past century, and we’ve picked 20 of our favourites.

Alfred Stieglitz –
The Steerage
(1907)
Alfred Stieglitz was a pioneer of photography who helped change the way many viewedphotography and elevate it to a fine art in America in the late 19th and early 20th century.
One of the first modernist photographs,
The Steerage
depicts the photographer’s ownjourney from the States to Europe to visit relatives and friends when he happened upon a view looking down toward the lower class passenger area, known on most ships as “the steerage”.
Today considered Stieglitz’s signature work, he later described it as, “another milestone in photography … a step in my own evolution, a spontaneous discovery,” paving the way for Henri Cartier-Bresson to follow in his footsteps. This new style of photography was published in a 1911 issue of Camera Work devoted to his photographs, alongside a Cubist drawing by Pablo Picasso
.
Henri Cartier-Bresson –
Place de l’Europe Gare Saint Lazare
(1932)

The god father of modern photojournalism inspired generations of amateur street photographers. Cartier-Bresson created a legacy thanks to the remarkable spontaneity of his work, and it remains as vibrant, vivid, and powerful as it did close to 100 years ago.
Cartier-Bresson masterfully captured spontaneous moments of everyday life that he termedthe ‘decisive moment’ which is perfectly expressed in his impulsive masterpiece of a man suspended in mid-air as he hops over a large puddle. It captures the dynamic movement of his unaware subject in that ‘decisive moment’ before his heel hits the water, creating a sense of anticipation.
Captured outside the bustling Saint Lazare train station in Paris, the ‘decisive moment’ took full advantage of the advancing technology with the latest camera, lens, and film. This helps Cartier-Bresson to pick out the contrasting ornamented spiked fence with the hazy building in the background and the still clearness of the reflection in the urban setting. The jumper is even mirrored in a poster behind him of a dancer leaping enthusiastically into the air for the Railowsky circus.
Charles Ebbets –
Lunch atop a Skyscraper (1932)
Depicting iron workers taking a nerve-shredding break from constructing the 70 floors of theart deco skyscraper at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, the image of workers perched far above the city is notable for capturing the bravery of the men and the casual nature with which they share lunch and cigarettes.
The daredevil’s lunch break has come to personify the perspiration and determination that built the USA and been referenced in popular culture many times over the years, notably in a promotional poster for the
TV show, Friends
.
Purporting to capture an impulsive moment, the photo was actually staged. “You see the picture once, you never forget it,” Rockefeller Center archivist Christine Roussel told Time magazine. But “the funniest part about the photographs,” she said, “were they were done for publicity.”

Dorothea Lange –
Migrant Mother (1936)
Taken in Nipomo, California during the height of the Great Depression to raise awareness of and provide aid to impoverished farmers, Dorothea Lange’s powerful portrait is the epitome of motherly concern.

Employed by the U.S. government’s Farm Security Administration, Lange’s timeless photo of Florence Owens Thompson and her children resting on her shoulders in a camp for people devastated by the failure of the pea crops is filled with apprehension and emotion.
Lange’s work is considered to be a part of the classic canon of American art and international photography, which has become a symbol of the plight of migrant farm workers during the Great Depression. A print can be seen in the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.

Co-founder of the Magnum Photos cooperative of photographers along with Henri Cartier-Bresson, Robert Capa’s image depicting the death of a soldier during the Spanish Civil War is one of history’s most famous and captivating war photographs.
Foreshadowing Eddie Adams’
Saigon Execution
(more on that later), which similarly showed the moment of death,
The FallingSoldier
was incredibly captured by Capa holding his camera above his head in the trenches, taking war photography to a different, more personal level.
The expressive image brings to mind an equally famous image of war in Spain,
Francisco Goya’s
The Third of May
, 1808
(1814) and prompted the British magazine
Picture Post
to label Capa “the greatest war photographer in the world” in 1938.
Sam Shere –
Hindenburg (1937)
It was the largest airship in production when it docked in Manchester Township, New Jersey after making the slow Atlantic crossing from Frankfurt, but the Hindenburg tragically exploded on impact with its mooring mast at Naval Air Station Lakehurst, killing 36 people.
The airship burns brightly, as its huge structure is engulfed in flames, instantaneously ending the era of passenger airships that were hailed as the future of the travel in the 1920s and 30s, along with many of the passengers on board.
“I had two shot in my (camera) but I didn’t even have to get it up to my eye,” said Shere. “I literally shot from the hip – it was over so fast there was nothing else to do.” Shere’s moment in time is a powerful image that found a new reference in later life as the cover art for Led Zeppelin’s first album, which
sold for $325,000
at Christie’s in June 2020.
