Terry Bennett,
History of Photography in China: Chinese Photographers 1844–1879 (
London: Quaritch, 2013)

This volume is Terry Bennett’s latest contribution to photography’s history in China, after
History of Photography in China 1842–1860
(2009) and
History of Photography in China: Western Photographers 1861–1879
(2010). The newest in this series is likewise devoted to photographs made in China, but, as its title tells us, the principle for any object’s inclusion is authorship by a Chinese photographer or a Chinese studio. The result is an impressive gathering of Chinese photographers. Some are famous names, such as Huafang (Afong), who centered his operations in Hong Kong; among less familiar names are the studios of Yazhen (A Chan) in Guangzhou, Tongxing (Tung Hing) in Fuzhou, and Ruisheng and Yifang (Jiu-San and E-Fong) in Xiamen.

Bennett combines a longstanding passion for collecting original photographs with his research interest directed mainly at photographers’ careers. Aside from surviving images—most of which are his own acquisitions—his primary interpretative resources are press reports and advertisements, which without doubt contain crucial data for revealing the various spans of photographic operations in China. He has successfully exploited the same methods to describe photography in Japan. Inevitably, the results of all his work on photography in East Asia tend toward an empirical drive at the expense of discursive reach, but nothing should gainsay the tremendous amount of information that any collecting/publishing enterprise by Bennett puts at the disposal of his readers. Users of Chinese Photographers 1844–1879 will also enjoy the high standard of visual reproduction and the fitting design format ensured by Bernard Quaritch.

Somewhat less accessible are the principles of the volume’s internal arrangement as well as the editorial divisions between the content of this and earlier China volumes. Bennett allows a good deal of overlap with his earlier work, and the considerable amount of space occupied by Western visitors in Chinese Photographers is awkward. I also question an eccentric approach to China’s geography, a possible misrepresentation of the limitations inherent in the work of that country’s photographers, and an overdependence on Western sources.

Bennett presents the material in chapter-by-chapter subdivisions: namely, Beijing, Hong Kong, Guangzhou (Canton), Shanghai, Fuzhou, Xiamen (Amoy), Hankou, Tianjin, Yantai (Chefoo), Ningbo, Shantou (Swatow), Jiujiang, Nanjing, Aomen (Macao), and Taiwan (Formosa). Guidance from one of these places to the next is minimal, so whatever reason justifies the sequence is not clear. Beijing is an obvious starting point in political geography, but historically it is not the first major station in photography’s cultural, social, and economic expansion in China. That was probably Macao, or just as probably Guangzhou, or perhaps Hong Kong. Or, instead, all these possibilities form a set of multiple contacts around Guangdong province’s primary estuary and maritime inlet. A grouping in this way and an alternative beginning would at least avoid breaking off Macao, for example, and locating it far from its neighboring settlements.

Beginning in the south would also match the weight of evidence for photography’s transmission northward along the seaboard and into the mainland. This is, as Bennett correctly describes it, the same general direction of military, commercial, and missionary penetration by Western imperial powers into Chinese territory. (Japanese movement into China is another history in another geography.) What in 1872 the British photographer David Griffith aptly called a “photographic raid” (22) is not very useful to the thrust of
Chinese Photographers
, but it captures superbly how Western visitors often imagined their relationship to a new visual technology, and especially their progressive transport of its use into China’s interior.
But in a volume devoted to the Chinese agents of production, a northward traffic is also crucial to understanding a Chinese acculturation of photography determined by several generations of effort and genius emanating from Guangdong. The cumulative effect of the present list of disconnected places is a history deracinated from its physical coordinates. And as so many of the Chinese photographers to whom Bennett refers were Guangdong residents or sojourners, a more forceful argument could direct attention to the role their province assumed in the global history of communications and media transfer. It might also recall how the dimensions of globality in particular changed during the period under discussion. After the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, Guangzhou and several other deep-water ports in China were suddenly closer to the familiar “ocean nations” whose ships berthed along their waterfronts. Whether local populations accommodated or resisted Western incursions, early photography around the globe was an exercise that followed shipping routes, just as surely as telegraph cables followed railways.
Various groups in Guangdong were among the first to grasp the flows of a changing economic order, and their awareness was by no means isolated from a rich culture of classical learning and epistemological renewal (and revolution). I can gesture only briefly to recent studies, but notable contributions are Michael Tsin,
Nation, Governance, and Modernity in China: Canton 1900–1927
(1999); Steven Miles,
The Sea of Learning
(2006); and a highly professional Chinese study organized by the Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences: Song Zuanyou’s
The Cantonese in Shanghai
/
Guangdongren zai Shanghai 1843–1949
(2007). Rudolf Wagner’s edited volume
Joining the Global Public
(2007), a set of essays on the early Shanghai press, which Bennett does cite, also contains material relevant to Guangdong’s role in Shanghai’s modernization.
Of course, the metropolitan and urban environments that Bennett describes were the primary sites of the most traceable history of early photography in China.
Most traceable. We still know too little concerning the beginnings of studio businesses outside towns, and virtually nothing concerning itinerant photographers whose capital outlay might have run to a mule and cart. (Fugitives beyond the retrieval of every other category of historical record, they exist in one or two rare and unpublished photographs indicating their bygone success.) But even though it is difficult to avoid, an urban emphasis may be one factor that creates a false expectation of what comprised the content of Chinese photographers’ images. In chapter 4, “Chinese Photography Considered,” Bennett differentiates the genres of portrait and landscape. His lengthy citations of nineteenth-century sources display the predictably essentialist and derogatory biases that tainted Western opinions. The sum of these is that Chinese studios (in the cities) competed strongly in the economy and aesthetics of portraiture, albeit an economy and aesthetics that differed from those of, say, Paris or Lima. By contrast, the subject of landscape in China during the same period, if left in the hands of its native owners, inspired only poor efforts lacking, in the words of Isaac Taylor Headland, any “delicacy of touch” (46).

