
Top 20 Famous Photographers from around the world and their photos

Famous Photographers: If you are an aspiring photographer and want to learn from the best, take a look at these top photographers who have achieved a lot within a short span of time. Some of these best photographers may be known to you and some have a great reputation in the history of photography. It's interesting to follow the path of these famous photographers since their photographs are a beautiful collection of vibrant colors which keeps the tradition alive. Photography is no more a business, it's a passion for many people, since they choose to leave their highly paid jobs and pursue their dreams, which takes them to distant lands, meeting people from different cultures and environments unknown to many people. Patience and hard work - sitting still in wilderness to get the perfect shot, goes a long way into making professional photographers.

Jimmy Nelson - Famous Photographer
Jimmy Nelson is a famous photographer from the UK and he has been taking amazing photography since 1987. Since 2010 he has been working on a series 'Before they Pass Away' which has made him travel extensively to places like Vietnam, Tibet, Africa and so on. He visits tribal people and takes photos of them in their natural habitat, which is really amazing, since the emotions are beautifully captured in his photos. His part 1 series has won him several international awards and he is currently working on the part two series. Jimmy Nelson's photography works have been exhibited in many international museums and leading art galleries.

Rehahn - Famous Photographer
Rehahn is a French photographer currently settled in Vietnam. He is quite popular for his photographs of India, Vietnam, and Cuba. He published his first book - Vietnam, Mosaic of Contrasts in 2014 which has more than 150 photographs of Vietnam which focuses specifically on the large diverse culture. According to his biography, "By capturing images of these exceptionally contrasting cultures, and collecting their traditional costumes and precious artifacts, he has built up the Precious Heritage Collection, which is now the core of the eponymous Gallery Museum". He is also known as a photographer who captures the souls of his models. Well, it's not a literal meaning, it's just that he is able to portray the emotions of the models in a soul-touching way.

Lee Jeffries - Famous Photographer
Lee Jeffries is from Manchester, UK and he enjoys traveling around the world to capture black and white portraits of homeless people. His passion for homeless portrait photography started when he participated in a marathon in London. He happened to come across a young woman huddled in a sleeping bag and his conception of homeless people changed drastically. According to Lee Jeffries, the emotions of homeless people seem to ooze out which can tell stunning stories. Ever since he has been photographing homeless people as his subjects and collects funds through his photos to help make the lives of homeless people a better place. Hats off to this photographer, who has humility and nobility in his work.

Joe McNally - Famous Photographer
Joe McNally is an award-winning photography with international recognition. He work is quite popular in more than 70 countries. According to his biography, "McNally is known worldwide as not only one of the top, technically excellent photographers of his generation, but his charming demeanor, confidence and humor make him a sought-after choice from CEO’s to celebrities to commercial and magazine clients alike. He is among the rare breed of photographer who has bridged the world between photojournalism and advertising, amassing an impressive commercial and advertising client list including FedEx, Sony, ESPN, Adidas, Land’s End, General Electric, Epson, MetLife, USAA, New York Stock Exchange, Lehman Brothers, PNC Bank, and the Beijing