Andy Warhol’s star-studded photographs:‘You fi nd out much more about him as a person’

W as Andy Warhol the first influencer of the modern world? The artist may have died two decades before social media turned the word into a job title, but Warhol’s prolific use of photography to capture a carefully curated life would have won the artist millions of followers today.
The artist as influencer is one of the themes the Art Gallery of South Australia will explore during the 2023 Adelaide festival in March, in AndyWarhol & Photography: A Social Media. It will be the first exhibition in Australia to focus on the artist’s lifelong obsession with photography, sourcing works both by him and of him from more than 30 public and private collections from around the world.
More than 250 works, including experimental films, silkscreens and paintings, will join the AGSA’s own extensive collection of 45 Warhol pieces, with the central photography component promising a candid glimpse into the pop artist’s celebrity-studded New Yorker lifestyle.

The AGSA curator Julie Robinson told Guardian Australia the exhibition will go a long way in demonstrating just why the artist, some 35 years after his death, remains as relevant and collectable as ever. Earlier this year his ShotSage Blue Marilyn became
the most expensive piece of 20th-century art ever sold at auction
, with the US$195m price eclipsing the previous record set by Pablo Picasso’s Les Femmes d’Alger (Version 0), which sold for US$179.4m in 2015.
“We’re all very familiar with his pop art paintings and sculptures but looking at his very public works, you don’t really get much of a sense of him as aperson,” Robinson says of Warhol, who famously described himself as a “deeply superficial” human being.
“So in looking at these photographs, you find out much more about Andy Warhol as a person. He was an extraordinary person, but he could also be an extraordinarily ordinary person as well.”
Like many of his iconic silk screens, Warhol’s photography is drenched with celebrity presence. But the glamour is surprisingly lacking in many of the images.

Warhol once said a good photograph is of someone famous doing something unfamous. So think Bianca Jagger shaving her armpit, or a bleary-eyed Mick Jagger at table with Warhol and William Burroughs, regarding the food before them with grim disinterest.
Muhammad Ali, Bob Dylan, Debbie Harry, John Lennon, Liza Minnelli, LouReed, Elizabeth Taylor – the superstars of the 60s, 70s and 80s all gravitated to Warhol’s infamous Factory in midtown Manhattan, and a camera was always at the ready.
And for the last decade of the artist’s life, an Australian was at the heart of itall. In the mid to late 1980s, Henry Gillespie was the Australian editor of Warhol’s Interview magazine: the publication the artist co-founded in 1969 and which continues to occupy an uber-cool niche of celebrity art andculture reportage.