The history of Russia begins with the emergence of the Slavs who appeared around 3-3,500 years ago, evolving from the Indo-European ethnic group. From the middle of the first millennium B.C., they began to move into Eastern Europe and populated the basin of Dnieper, Dniester, Western Dvina, Oka, and upper Volga by the 8th century B.C.

The first Russian state, Kievan Rus’, existed for about 300 years. It was a federation of principalities, ruled by the Rurik clan. The development of feudal relations and the strengthening of the independence of separate cities resulted in political fragmentation of Kievan Rus’. In the late 1330s, the Mongols descended upon Rus’ and it was put under the suzerainty of the Khanate of the Golden Horde for almost 250 years. The yoke accelerated Rus’ dissolution, but at the same time progressively turned into an incentive for integration as the economy and culture were reviving. Due to a number of factors, in the beginning of the 14th century, Moscow took the place of the political leader, which is explained by its favorable geographical position and far-sighted policy of its princes (knyazes).

The 17th-18th centuries marked a new period in Russian history when the capitalist system began to form, while the feudal system remained and even strengthened. The historical period known as the “Time of Troubles” caused by the extinction of Ruriks with the death of Ivan IV the Terrible’s son played an important role in these events. The social unrest caused by famine and strengthening of feudal exploitation sparked to such an extent that resulted in the first peasant war in the country’s history.

The era of Peter the Great became the time of serious changes, embracing all aspects of state and public life. The efforts of Peter I produced excellent results, although they were achieved by violence and exploitation of people. Their main result was the country's transformation into a maritime power that significantly accelerated its development, reserving a rightful place for it among European states.

The reign of Catherine II is called "the golden age of nobility" and "enlightened absolutism" as the Empress completed the process of nobility’s transformation into the privileged class. The situation considerably worsened for the peasants: serfdom acquired the features of slavery. The increase in social conflicts resulted in E. Pugachev’s peasant war, but its failure led to the expansion of feudal dependence. All this heralded the maturing crisis of the feudal system, acutely manifested in the 19th century.

By the beginning of 1812, most of Europe fell into vassalage from France. Russia and Britain were the only countries that posed a threat to Napoleon's plans. In 1812, Napoleon invaded Russia with forces three times exceeding the western Russian army under the command of generals, but after six months of his campaign, the army, the strongest in history, was completely destroyed.

By the middle of the 19th century, servile relationships in the country worsened and deteriorated: they aroused the landlords’ fears for the future, while the serfs had the growing discontent of their miserable condition. In the context of peasant unrest, particularly during the Crimean War, in 1862, the government, headed by Alexander II, held a reform to abolish serfdom.