The 6 Most Important Lovers of Catherine the Great

Catherine the Great remains one of the most fascinating female figures in history: a girl who was simply a political pawn, married off to a man she barely knew in a far-away land. She became the most powerful woman in the world at the time, deposing her husband and ruling over what is widely perceived to be a Golden Age in Russian history. Whilst it is far from the most interesting thing about her, Catherine’s love life was widely reported on. Following the removal of her husband, she kept lovers in the same way kings and emperors had kept mistresses: for pleasure, and often for political reasons, amassing 22 known lovers in her life. But who exactly were these men who gave Catherine quite such a reputation?

Her husband, Emperor Peter III of Russia
Catherine married Peter, then the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, aged 16: their marriage was not consummated for another 12 years, due to both Peter’s unstable mental state and his impotence. The couple produced two children: an heir, Paul, and a daughter, Anna Petrovna, who died in infancy. Peter took mistresses and Catherine responded in kind. Some have questioned the parentage of Paul – Catherine herself heavily hinted in her memoirs that Paul’s father was in fact Sergei Saltykov, one of her lovers at the time. A mere 6 months into his reign, Peter was overthrown in a coup d’etat orchestrated by Catherine and several leading nobles who were unhappy with Peter’s pro-Prussian policies. Catherine assumed the role of empress regent following Peter’s forced abdication: a position she held until her death in 1796.

Stanisław August Poniatowski
Catherine had several affairs before she became Empress: Poniatowski was a Polish aristocrat and diplomat and the two became lovers sometime around 1758. Poniatowski supported a pro-Russian stance within Polish politics, and when Catherine became empress, she wrote expressing her support for his ascension to the Polish throne. Poniatowski also proposed to Catherine, seeing political advantage in being married to the empress of Russia: however, this seems to have been a widely ridiculed prospect at the time. Poniatowski eventually was elected king in 1763, with the support of Catherine, Russia and 2.5 million rubles. The aim was to have Poland as effectively a puppet state, which was largely accomplished.

Grigory Orlov
Orlov was serving as an artillery officer in St Petersburg when he met Catherine, who was then Grand Duchess. The two were conspirators as well as lovers, with Orlov playing an important role in the coup d’etat against Emperor Peter. Catherine rewarded Orlov handsomely, making him a count as well as Adjutant-General, Director-General of Engineers, and General-in-Chief, and gifting him the Marble Palace in St Petersburg. The Orlov family remained key players at court for a number of years after the coup. At one point, Catherine was seriously tempted to marry her favorite, but this never came to fruition. Orlov’s rivals defamed him, claiming he had seduced his 13-year-old ward, and eventually Catherine’s head was turned by the younger Grigory Potemkin – although not before he had helped Catherine buy the 189-carat diamond which she later named after him: the Orlov Diamond. She was said to be distraught when he died, despite their estrangement in later years.