23 Signs Of Mentally Abusive Parents
What Is Mental Abuse
Mental abuse, also known as psychological abuse, is characterized by the repeated use of non-physical acts such as manipulation, threats, intimidation, and isolation to control, harm, or punish an individual. It can have serious and long-term effects on the victim’s mental health, emotional well-being, and self-esteem.

Types
Mental abuse toward children can take many forms. Here are the fivetypes of mentally abusive behavior
.
Rejecting
Isolating
Terrorizing
Ignoring
Corrupting
Signs Of Mentally Abusive Parents
Parental abuse
can cause lasting harm to the mental, emotional, and physical health of their children. It is important to be able to recognize the signs of mental abuse so that you can get help for yourself or for a loved one.
This type of abuse is often hard to detect because it is non-physical. During the course of the day or when
disciplining their children
,many parents make negative comments or give constructive criticism. Itdoes not make them abusive.
However, a pattern of behavior can still indicate risk of abuse. Here aresome common signs of mentally abusive adults
.
1.
Constant criticism or belittling
2.
Aggressive Outbursts and yelling
3.
Isolation or restriction
4.
Gaslighting
or manipulation
5.
Financial control or exploitation
6.
Threats of punishment or physical abuse
7.
Excessive control or monitoring
8.
Public humiliation or embarrassment
9.
Withholding basic needs

10.
Blaming the child for their own problems
11.
Withholding affection or love
12.
Forbidding the child from expressing their opinions or feelings
13.
Calling derogatory names or verbal abuse
14.
Ridiculing the child’s appearance, abilities, or background
15.
Emotional blackmail or guilt-tripping
16.
Using excessive discipline or punishment
17.
Blocking the child’s access to education, opportunities, or social interactions
18.
Treating the child differently based on favoritism
19.
Telling the child that they are worthless or unwanted
20.
Damaging property
21.
Emotional neglect
22.
Set unrealistic expectations
23.
Singling out one child
Effects Of Mental Abuse On Children
Mental abuse from parents can have adverse effects on health –emotional and physical.

Depression And Anxiety Disorders
Inadequacy and worthlessness are common themes in mental abuse, and these feelings can damage a child’s sense of self.
Children who are mentally abused are often made to feel
rejected
and unvalued, leading to diminished self-esteem and feelings of hopelessness.

Some children with a heightened level of anxiety can also suffer from poor body image due to maltreatment.
They tend to develop mental health issues such as depression and anxiety disorders
.
Borderline Personality Disorder
It is estimated that 20–40% of all psychiatric inpatient admissions are related to borderline personality disorder (BPD).
Approximately 84% of people with BPD engage in suicidal behaviors,and 8% die by suicide
.
This serious psychiatric disorder is often found in children who have suffered childhood emotional abuse
.
Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Abuse during childhood is a
traumatic experience
during the
formative years
.
However,
emotional abuse
and
child neglect
do not fulfill the DSM criterion for PTSD, which requires that the events be life-threatening
.
Yet psychiatrists have found that childhood mental abuse can result in symptoms similar to those of PTSD and have coined this “complex PTSD,” or developmental PTSD
.
Symptoms of this mental health condition include reexperiencing the trauma, substance abuse, and difficulties with interpersonal relationships.

Physical Health Issues
Childhood abuse, though only emotional, can result in problems in one’s physical health in various ways.
When a child is chronically exposed to high a level of stress during development, their blood pressure, immunity, and stress response are affected, leaving them vulnerable to stress-induced illnesses, such as cardiovascular disease, gastrointestinal problems, and chronic pain
.
In some cases, childhood mental abuse also leads to unhealthy
coping mechanisms
, including substance abuse, eating disorders,and self-harm, which can further impact one’s physical health.
Also See:
Trauma-Informed Parenting
Signs Of Mental Abuse In Children
1.
Anxiety and fear
2.
Low self-esteem
3.
Depressive symptoms
4.
Nightmares or sleep problems
5.
Bed wetting
6.
Loss in appetite
7.
Withdrawal from friends and activities
8.
Lack of trust in others
9.
Poor school performance
10.
Self-harm behaviors
11.
Antisocial behaviors
12.
Destructive behavior
13.
Difficulty expressing emotions
14.
Aggressive behavior
15.
Difficulty concentrating
16.
Suicidal thoughts or attempt
17.
Delayed physical, emotional, or intellectual development
18.
Substance abuse
19.
Running away from home
20.
Regression to younger behaviors (bed-wetting, thumb-sucking)
21.
Lack social skills
22.
Difficulty forming and maintaining relationships with peers