Children and Adults

ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) is a neurological disorder that impacts the parts of the brain that help us plan, focus on, and execute tasks. ADHD symptoms vary by sub-type — inattentive, hyperactive, or combined — and are often more difficult to diagnose in girls and adults. Here, we review the symptoms, causes, types, and tests associated with ADD and ADHD.

What Is ADHD? Symptoms & Meaning
ADHD stands for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, a complex brain disorder that impacts approximately 11% of children and almost 5% of adults in the U.S.

ADHD is a developmental impairment of the brain’s executive functions. People with ADHD have trouble with impulse control, focusing, and organization. Neuroscience, brain imaging, and clinical research tell us a few important things: ADHD is not a behavior disorder. ADHD is not a mental illness. ADHD is not a specific learning disability. ADHD is, instead, a developmental impairment of the brain’s self-management system. Both adults and children can be diagnosed with ADHD.

ADHD Symptoms
What are the signs of being ADHD? Common ADHD symptoms include:

Inattention
Lack of focus
Poor time management
Weak impulse control
Exaggerated emotions
Hyperfocus
Hyperactivity
Executive dysfunction
ADHD symptoms vary by individual. You or your child may experience all or just some of the above symptoms, along with others detailed in the DSM-V. Many patients and clinicians describe ADHD as an iceberg, where most symptoms lay hiding under the surface — out of sight but ever present. If you think you or a loved one might have ADHD, take one of our free, anonymous tests below to see if you should seek a formal diagnosis.

What Are the 3 Types of ADHD?
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) previously identified three types of ADHD:

Primarily hyperactive-impulsive type
Primarily inattentive type (formerly called ADD)
Primarily combined type
Primarily Hyperactive-Impulsive ADHD
People with primarily hyperactive-impulsive ADHD act “as if driven by a motor” with little impulse control — moving, squirming, and talking at even the most inappropriate times. They are impulsive, impatient, and interrupt others.

Primarily Inattentive ADHD (Formerly ADD)
People with the inattentive subtype of ADHD have difficulty focusing, finishing tasks, and following instructions. They are easily distracted and forgetful. They may be daydreamers who lose track of homework, cell phones, and conversations with regularity.

Experts believe that many children with the inattentive subtype of ADHD may go undiagnosed because they do not tend to disrupt the learning environment. [Free Download: An In-Depth Guide to Inattentive ADHD]

Primarily Combined Type ADHD
Individuals with combined-type ADHD display a mixture of all the symptoms outlined above. A physician will diagnose patients with this Combined Type ADHD if they meet the guidelines for Primarily Inattentive ADHD and Primarily Hyperactive-Impulsive ADHD. That is, they must exhibit 6 of the 9 symptoms identified for each subtype.

How Do Physicians Diagnose the Type of ADHD?
These subtypes are now considered "presentations" in the most recent version of the DSM, the DSM-V. Researchers determined that people often move from one subtype to another. For example, a child may present as primarily hyperactive-impulsive in preschool and lose much of the hyperarousal in adolescence to fit the primarily inattentive presentation. In college and adulthood, the same individual may transition to combined presentation.